PESTICIDE USAGE
IN THE
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN REGION
VOLUME JTE
Environment Division
Technical Department
LAC Region
The World Bank
St~.fE-7"


﻿D. COUNTRY PROFILES
The eight country profiles of pest management practices in this section
are included at this point to provide access to the studies that have been
completed up to now. Additional profiles are to be completed during the
coming year.
Although practices vary substantially from country to country, each of
the studies attempts to cover, in more or less the same order, the following
basic points: (1) Background, (2) Pest Management Practices, (3) Pesticide
Usage, (4) Pesticide Regulation-Legal and Institutional, (5) Pesticide
Importation and Production, (6) Distribution, Transportation and Storage, (7)
Crop/Pest/Pesticide Analysis, (8) Recommendations for Action.
The authors of the individual profiles acknowledge the assistance of a
large number of in-country specialists directly involved in pesticide usage and
control in compiling these reports. The authors also point out that no report
on pesticide usage will stay up to date very long. It is a field in rapid change-
-not only in the products used and government measures for their control,
but also in the very role of pesticides in more integrated approaches to pest
management.
Therefore, in using these country profiles as guidance on current pest
management practices and pesticide usage in individual countries,
the reader should take into account the date at which the profile was
completed (given near the beginning of each profile) and the dates of data
collection given in many of the tables. The older profiles will almost surely
have to be up-daed before placing heavy reliance on present accuracy.
With these limitations, we think that the profiles can be useful in providing
basic country data and background on the pest management practices and
products. The profiles may be especially useful at the early stages of project
identification and preparation to anticipate potential environmental impact
problems.
The author will welcome comments and suggestions for strengthening
and improving up-coming country profiles, and for up-dating the ones
included here.


﻿COUNTRY PROFILE 2: COLOMBIA


﻿COUNTRY PROFILE 2: COLOMBIA
CONTENTS
2.1. Background
2.2. Pest Management Practices
2.2.1. General
2.2.2. Main Crops
2.3. Pesticide Usage
2.3.1. General Analysis
2.3.2. Main Pesticides Used
2.3.3. Acceptability of Pesticides in Use
2.3.4. Problems of Pesticide Usage
2.3.4.1. Residues in Harvested Crops
2.3.4.2. Environmental Hazards
2.3.4.3. Pesticide Poisonings
2.3.4.4. Pesticide Resistance
2.3.4.5. Use of Undesirable Pesticides
2.3.4.6. Misuse & Mishandling of Pesticides
2.3.5. Conclusions on Pesticide Usage
2.4. Pesticide Regulation
2.4.1. The Existing System
2.4.2. Restricted or Banned Products
2.4.3. Issues Concerning Pesticide Regulation
continued ....


﻿2.5. Pesticide Production
2.5.1. Producers' Association
2.5.2. Manufacture of Active Ingredients
2.5.3. Problems with Manufacture of Active Ingredients
2.5.4. Formulation of Products
2.5.5. Problems with Formulation of Products
2.5.6. Adulteration and False Labelling
2.6. Distribution, Transportation & Storage of Pesticides
2.7. Crop/Pest/Pesticide Analysis
2.7.1. Potatoes
2.7.2. Various Vegetables
2.7.3. Maize
2.7.4. Rice
2.7.5. Sorghum
2.7.6. Cereals
2.7.7. Bananas
2.7.8. Various Fruit Crops
2.7.9. Coffee
2.7i.10. Oil Palm
2.7.11. Cotton
2.7.12. Oramewntal Plowers
2.7.13. Pasture
2.7.14. Soya
2.7.15. Sugar Cane
2.7.16. Tobacco
2.7.17. Cocoa
2.7.18. Industrial & Roadside
2.7.19. Additional Crops


﻿2.1. Background
Of Colombia's total land area of 104 m ha, nearly 5.4 m ha is
used for crop production and of this about 1.6 m ha is under
permanent crops. Less than 10% of the cropped area is irrigated.
Permanent pasture occupies 40 m ha, especially in the north, and
50 m ha is covered with forests or woodland.
Nearly 9 m people, or 27% of the economically active population,
are involved in agriculture.   During the 60's, 70's and 80's
there was a major shift in population away from rural areas and
towards the cities, driven by underemployment and low wages in
the countryside and the threat of political violence. However
the trend has recently slowed due to improved agricultural
earnings.
Reform of landholding has not yet been carried through on a
significant scale. A third of all farming land is held by <1%
of landowners, while 78% of farmers own plots of 10 ha or less.
This has implications for the safe and effective use of
pesticides (see Section 2.2).
For a long time the economy was heavily based on the export of
coffee.  During the 1980's it was successfully diversified so
that by the end of the decade coffee accounted for only one third
of exports as opposed to a half.    This is still a dangerous
proportion  because, quite apart    from  fluctuations in the
international coffee price, uncontrollable outbreaks of e.g.
disease can occur.    Other major agricultural exports include
bananas at US$300m, fresh flowers at US$250m, plus sugar,
tobacco, grain, potatoes and cocoa.       The authorities and
producers are keenly aware of the need for pesticide residues to
be at acceptable levels in export crops (see Section 2.3.4.1).
In discussing pesticide usage and problems in Colombia it is
important to distinguish between two different sectors of the
agricultural production. There is the so-called "technified"
market for pesticides, consisting of established farms of
significant size on which the farmers utilise measurable levels
of inputs. This market is accessible, quantifiable and can be
assessed in terms of its efficiency, environmental performance
etc.
The other sector is "non-technified" peasant farming, which is
often on small, shifting plots cultivated by illiterate or semi-
illiterate farmers. A wide range of crops is grown in this way
but e.g. potatoes and maize would be typical. The farmers may
use inputs such as pesticides, especially on potatoes, but
generally the market is not accessible and is difficult to
quantify. Hard data about efficiency, environmental and human
safety etc. do not exist but it can truthfully be said that
recognisable standards do not exist either.
Most of the information in this report refers to the technified
sector of the market.    Data on the non-technified sector are
included where they are obtainable, e.g. estimates of granular
insecticide use on potatoes.


﻿2.2.  Pest Management Practices
2.2.1. General
The major crops have 'national growers' federations" which are
in fact government-run organisations.   They include Fedecafe
(coffee), Federalgodon (cotton) and Fedearroz (rice).    These
associations have staffs of agronomists who are available to
advise growers on technical matters including pest management.
However their expertise and effectiveness, both in the field and
in the work of farmer training, is a matter of controversial
debate.
It is possible to find larger farms and plantations where the
overall level of pest management is satisfactory, with pesticides
being use safely and effectively in a reasonable programme of
crop protection.   Even here, however, there are some serious
short-comings.   For example flagmen are routinely used in the
aerial spraying of highly toxic organophosphate insecticides on
cotton (see Section 2.3.4.3).
On most farms, and certainly on all the non-technif ied area, pest
management is a matter of pesticide application with little or
no attention to the practices required for safe and effective
use.  The large multinational pesticide companies have farmer
training programmes to improve standards in this area but, while
they deserve praise for this effort, it is not able to make much
of an impact, especially in non-technified crops. An exception
is Ln aerial application, where such training programmes have led
to i-mprcved performance generally.
Overall and with few exceptions it may be said that pest
management practices, especially the use of pesticides, range
from poor to very bad.
For specific information on farmer practice in the handling and
use of pesticides see Sections 2.3.4 and 2.3.4.6.
2.2.2. Main Crops
Coffee
Coffee is grown in both the technified and non-technified
sectors. Over the country as a whole, the distribution of cof f ee
plantation sizes is as follows:
1-10 ha             11-20 ha            > 20 ha
35%                 38%                 26%
In general, out of the total area of 1.1 m ha, about 300,000 ha
is regarded as technified with some level of expertise in
management and the use of inputs. The rest is run on very poor
technical standards.


﻿Formerly there was very little use of herbicides and weed control
was largely done using hoes and machetes, even in the technified
area. For many years Fedecafe discouraged the use of herbicides
in order to protect farm labourers' Jobs and keep them on the
land. However in the mid 1980's coffee rust (Hemileia vastatrix)
appeared and every farmer needed a knapsack sprayer to control
it with fungicides.     Copper fungicides were   given away by
Fedecafe and they also trained the farmers in their use. With
the universal availability of spray equipment and the general
comprehension  of  the pesticide concept the     use of   total
herbicides became more common. Usage has now increased to the
point where 72% of technified farmers use glyphosate (Roundup)
and 36% use paraquat (Gramoxone).
A recent survey has shown that growers inspect their plantations
for signs of the main disease problem, rust, as follows:
daily               34%
weekly              31%
fortnightly         15%
monthly             14%
other times          6%
However, in timing their sprays against rust, 88% of growers
relied on the Technical Committee of Fedecafe.     Most farmers
apply fungicides at 2-4 monthly intervals; almost half of them
use a 3 month interval.
At first, with the availability of free copper oxychloride
fungicides from Fedecafe, the modern systemic fiungicides were not
used in significant amount (they are more effective but cost
more). However the subsidy has now been withdrawn and they are
coming much more into use, at least in the techxLified area.
Potatoes
This crop is grown largely by smallholder farmexs. In the non-
technified area plots of 1-2 ha or less are commcn. Over 80% of
the farms are <10 ha and the country mean size is 7.4 ha.
There is very little use of herbicides and weeds are controlled
manually. However these farmers literally satu2rate their crop
with insecticidal soil drenches or granules (mainly carbofuran)
against the white grub Premnotrypes vorax.     Ix terms of pest
management there is no attempt to do anything other than apply
insecticides.
The common, and undesirable, practice is to apply granules using
the bare hands.


﻿Rice
The following is a summary only;   a great deal more detail is
available if required.
80% of rice farms are <10 ha and the mean size for the whole
country is <8 ha.
The national rice growers' association, Fedearroz, gives a lot
of credit to farmers and tends to dictate the varieties grown and
the programmes for fertilisers and pesticides.
In 1990 usage of pesticides in rice averaged over $170/ha which
is not unusually high for technified rice growing. An analysis
in 1986 (which is likely to be still roughly valid) showed that
pest control accounted for 29% of the tctal costs of rice
production. Of this, weed control accounted for nearly 14% and
insect and disease control for a little over 7% each; the other
minor component was rodent control.
Insect control is almost exclusively done by the intensive,
blanket use of broad spectrum insecticides applied by air. At
farmer level there is little or no attempt to develop integrated
programmes of pest management, despite the usual interest in
research institutes and lip service within Fedearroz. Parasites,
pred4tors and diseases of the insect pests are well known but
although various attempts have been made to use them they have
not had any commercial impact.    Farmers and their agronomist
advisers prefer to use insecticides when damage thresholds are
passed.   In general, though claims are made about IPH and
reducing pesticide inputs, these carry little weight with
farmers.
Control of fungal diseases is by the use of fungicides, since
existing varieties of rice do not have sufficient resistance.
The White Leaf Disease, which is caused by a virus or similar
micro-organism   transmitted  by   the  planthopper   Soga todes
oryzicola, is controlled by using insecticides.
Weed control is also heavily pesticide-dependent.    In general
soil preparation is not good and its contribution to weed control
is minimal.    However, unlike the use of insecticides, the
herbicide programmes are usually fairly sophisticated and well
put together.
Research in rice comes under the Rice National Programme. This
is handled by Fedearroz, ICA and CIAT (Centro Internacional de
Agricultura Tropical) and is funded by the Rice Promotion
Tranche, a levy on farmers for each kilogram of rice produced.
The Rice National Programme includes resistance to insects and
diseases among the objectives of its breeding programme.     It
appears that these efforts have met with little success, since
the three most prevalent varieties IR-22, CICA 8 and ORYZICA 1
all require high pesticide inputs.


﻿Cotton
The following is a summary only;   a great deal more detail is
available if required.
An good IPM programme has been developed by the National Cotton
Growers Federation, Federalgxdon. It includes:
*    Timely destruction of previous cotton crop residues.
*    Weed control, mainly with herbicides.
*    Correct use of fertilisers.
*    Careful selection and use of vesticides so as to
preserve beneficial predators and parasites Use of
microbial insecticides, insect growth regulators etc.
and release of artificially reared parasites.
*    Control of the boll weevil by the use of dry islands,
trap crops, pheromones, and other techniques; these
approaches have in some areas reduced the need for
boll weevil sprays from 11 to 1.
*    Use  of economic   damage  thresholds  to  determine
spraying times.
*    Legal measures including quarantine, sowing and fallow
periods, etc.
However the extent to which farmers adopt all or part of the
programme varies greatly according to their degree of sophis-
tication and other factors.      There is a tendency towards
preserving beneficial parasites and predators early in the season
by delaying the use of broad-spectrum insecticides, using them
at lower doses, and to using insect growth regulators for early
season pests where possible. There is also a certain amount of
interest in the use of sex-attractant pheromones for control of
e.g. the pink bollworm, Pectinophora gossypiella. This tendency
is best seen, if anywhere, in the Valle del Cauca area where boll
weevil is not yet much of a problem arvJd it is easier to avoid
early seasoi- use of broad-spectrum compounds.
However pest management at farmer level is still almost totally
dependent on pesticides.   Insect control has been a long term
problem, especially for the bollworm Heliothis virescens;
infestations of this pest can reach levels unknown in other
cotton growing countries and, largely because of the uncontrolled
use of insecticides to deal with it, resistance has now developed
(see Section 2.3.4.4).
The boll weevil, Anthonomus grandis, first appeared in Colombia
in 1946. However it did not reach the main cotton growing area
of Tolima until the 1980's and it was 1992 before it reached the
Valle del Cauca. It is now the major pest in many areas.


﻿The cost of one insecticide application to cotton varies from
around $15/ha with pyrethroids, to $26/ha with the newer
carbamates such as thiodicarb, to $32/ha with insect growth
regulators such as chlorfluazuron.
Sorghum
This crop is grown by large-scale farmers. The two main insect
pests, sorghum midge (Contarinia sorghicola) and tobacco budworm
(Heliothis zea) cause enormous losses if not controlled. There
is no attempt at IPM programmes for these pests and blanket
spraying of insecticides from the air is the rule.
Maize
This crop is mainly grown by smallholder farmers. In the non-
technified area plots of 1-1.5 ha are common. 80% of farms are
<10 ha and the country mean size is <8 ha. They use paraquat for
weed control and very little else.
Various Vegetables
Among the technified vegetable farmers there is a move towards
the more targeted use of pesticides than in the past, but pest
control programmes remain heavily pesticide oriented.
Bananas
The crops grown on    the large, technified plantatis are
saturated with multiple sprays of fungicides applied by air.
This is not a cause for criticism, since at present there is no
other means known of controlling the main diseases. If a more
integrated programme should ever become available it would be
adopted immediately by these farmers.
Soya
This crop tends to be grown in rotation with sorghum and cotton,
especially in the Valle del Cauca. Before 1990 the production
of crops such as soya was protected by punitive tariffs on
imported commodity.    As a result the soya area expanded
enormously in the late 1980's to a peak of some 120,000 ha by
1990.  By 1992, with the withdrawal of the tariffs, this had
shrunk to 35,000 ha;    the highly profitable sugar crop has
replaced much of the lost soya area.
The degree of sophistication of the pest management programmes
varies, as with other crops, according to the area and the type
of farmer. In the Valle del Cauca, which is the core area and
has the most advanced farmers, considerable progress has been
made with IPM and it plays a significant role. In Tolima insect
pests are controlled mainly with insecticides. In the plains


﻿(Los Llanos) the farmers are relatively unsophisticated, insect
pests are not very serious and insecticides are used less, though
herbicides are used for weed control.
Various Fruits
There is a significant number of small-scale, fairly sophist-
icated growers producing specialised fruit for export. Although
their pest management programmes rely heavily on pesticides.,
these growers are well aware of the need to observe residue
tolerances in their produce and the overall 3tandards of
pesticide use are reasonable.
Oil Palm
This crop tends to be grown on plantations owned by large multi-
national companies.   As a result pest management operat,ons,
though still relying heavily on pesticides, are well carried out.
They are conscious of the importance -4 the pollinating weevil
Elaeidobius kamerunicus and of the reed not to kill it, so
selective insecticides such as Bacillus thuringiensis and insect
growth regulators are used when overall sprays are necessary.
Ornamantal Flowers
These growers, who have some 3,000 ha under protected
cultivation, are all highly sophisticated and are- geared to the
USA and other markets.   Although they are intezested in IPM,
using for example the selective insecticide pirimicarb to control
aphids, they have to fumigate the soil against nematodes and
other pests and this interferes with the use of biological
controls.
Furthermore, because they are exporting their produce they are
allowed under the "Plan Vallejo" to import the pesticides they
need direct, without paying duty. There is thus less incentive
to minimise pesticide use.


﻿2.3. Pesticide Usage
2.3-1. General Analysis
The total value of all pesticides used in Colombia in 1990 was
S231m at first distributor level.   This puts it 18th. in the
global agrochemical market, equal to Eungary. The usage can be
broadly broken down by product class as follows:
Insecticides         Fungicides          Herbicides
Value   Cum. Area    Value   Cum. Area   Value   Cum. Area
Sm        m ha   15            m ha      $m       m ha
76        6.5        50        5.0       105       5.7
33%       38%        22%       29%       45%       33%
It can be seen that, as usual, the herbicide component takes up
a much higher proportion of the value than of the cumulative area
treated. This is because the cost of treatment per hectare is
much higher with herbici=s than with fungicides.   Insecticide
costs generally fall between the two.
Since 1980 the market has grown at almost 9% p.a., though in 1990
the expansion was only 6%.; taking inflation into account that
represents a shrinkage in real terms of about 3%. Nevertheless,
growth is expected to continue and the market to reach $277m by
1995.
The decrease ii pesticide use in 1990 was due mainly to dry
weather conditions and a reduction in the planted area for major
crops such as rice, potatoes and soyabeans; instability caused
by guerrilla threats also played a part. However it is said that
the growing importance of biological crop protection, and wider
acceptance of integrated pest management systems, have begun to
impinge on pesticide sales.
continued....


﻿The split of the 1990 market by crop was:
Rice                               26%
Cotton                             19%
Vegetables, including potatoes      16%
Pasture                            9%
Fruit                              5%
Sugar Cane                         4%
Coffee                             3%*
Soya                               3%
Others, including grains           15%
*    The large sums spent on subsidising coffee fungicides
during the late 1980's (see Section 2.2.2) distorted the
market and caused confusion about the market size and
split.   A sum of around $20 m used to be included for
coffee fungicides which were actually given away free to
farmers.   However the subsidy was stopped and the total
1990 figure was $6.6 m, i.e. -3%, of which fungicides
represented $1.4 m. (Section 2.7.9).
For a detailed analysis of pesticide usage, broken down by crop
and pest, see Section 2.7.   This analysis shows, for example,
that cotton insecticides valued at $33m took up 43% of total
insecticide usage.


﻿2.3.2. Main P-sticides Used
The following analysis is taken from the usage figures given in
Section 2.7. However those figures are not exhaustive, and where
it has been possible to establish a more accurate figure for a
particular ai, that figure is used rather than the summation from
Section 2.7. lEven so, estimates of usage differ, sometimes
considerably, and usage varies from year to year. The following
figures should therefore be regarded as indicative only.
Products are listed in order of importance by volume (te ai).
Those marked "!" have some special characteristic as noted in
Section 2.3.3. and in the relevant Product Profile. The product
marked *X" is not acceptable to the Bank and Bank finance should
not be used for its procurement.
Main Insecticides and Acaricides Used
Active Ingredient       Usage            Cumulative
(te/annum)         Area (ha)
parathion-methyl           940              970,000
methomyl                   156              620,000
monocrotophos              350              610,000
endosulfan                 230              440,000
chlorpyrifos               250              410,000
dimethoate                 170              290,000
methanidophos             170              280,000
carbofuran                 170              210,000
trichlorfon                140              170,000
thiodicarb                  74              150,000
profenofos                  83              120,000
! phosphamidon                71              110,000
! malathion                  120              100,000
! carbaryl                   160               85,000
! gauma-HCH                  33               65,000
! parathion-ethyl             35               50,000
cypermethrin +              34               50,000
profenofos


﻿Main Fungicides and Bactericides Used
Active Ingredient       Usage            Cumulative
(te/annum)         Area (ha)
mancozeb                 5,400            2,400,000
benomyl                     60              430,000
maneb                      660              270,000
carbendazi-m                61              240,000
mineral oil              1,300              220,000
copper oxychloride         300              210,000
propineb                   160              150,000
fentin hydroxide            43              150,000
tridemorph                  64              140,000
thiabendazole               37              120,000
-difenphos                  77              100,000
mancozeb + metalaxyi        94               90,000
cymoxanil + mancozeb       120               85,000
thiophanate-methyl          29               83,000
iprobenfos                  49               69,000
chlorothalonil             110               60,000
kasugamycin +               29               37,000
phosdiphen
copper oxychloride +        53               27,000
mancozeb
captan                      45                N/A*
* Main use is in seed dressings.


﻿Main Herbicides Used
Active Ingredient       Usage            Cumulative
(te/annum)         Area (ha)
2,4-D                      860               890,000
paraquat                   450               750,000
2,4-D + picloram           780               700,000
propanil                 1,100               280,000
atrazine                   410               260,0 00
glyphosate                 350               240,000
diuron                     320               240,000
2,4-D + ioxynil             54               185,000
butachlor                  380               180,000
etolachlor                350               160,000
ametryn                    220               150,000
pendimethalin              180               140,000
trifluralin                210               130,000
oxadiazon                  110               122,000
bentazone                   77                83,000
MSMA                       160                76,000
2,4-D + dichlorprop        120                69,000
fluometuron                 68                68,000
alachlor                   110                57,000
thiobencarb                140                39,000
2,4-D + dicamba             61                35,000
ametryn + atrazine          40                16,000


﻿2.3.3. Acceptability of Pesticides in Use
The following list shows all pesticides (including plant growth
regulators) registered in Colombia, arranged in alphabetical
order. It does not include formulation adjuvants or pheromones;
the latter are referred to in the relevant crop sections (2.7).
Note that, while the spellings in the list are the accepted
international versions, local Spanish spellings may differ, e.g.
fosmet for phosmet, metomilo fcr methomyl.
Products marked *X- are not eligible for funding by the Bank.
Such products are usually no longer registered for use in OECD
countries, because they pose unacceptable hazards to human health
or the environment.
Those marked "!" are eligible for funding by the Bank but have
some special characteristic to which attention needs to be drawn
(e.g. high toxicity, environmental impact, special constraints
on manufacture to avoid hazardous contaminants). Notes on this
aspect will be found in the relevant product profile in Main
Section 5 of this Compendium.
Products listed without annotation are in principle eligible for
Bank funding;   products not listed at all here may still be
eligible for Bank funding.   In all questions relating to the
procurement of pesticides with Bank finance, the advice of the
Regional Environment Division or Environment Department should
be sought.
List of Pesticides
2,4-D                             benzalconium chloride
AATC                              beta -cypermethrin
acephate                          bifenox
acifluorfen                       bifenthrin
alachlor                          bitertanol
! aldicarb                        ! blasticidin-S
alpha-naphthalene acetic        ! brodifacoum
acid        bromacil
! aluminium phosphide              bromadiolone
ametryn                           bromophos-ethyl
aminotriazole (amitrole)          bromopropylate
amitraz                           butachlor
ammonium quaternary salt          butifos
asulam                            captan
! atrazine                        ! carbaryl
avermectin                        carbendazim
I azinphos-methyl                 ! carbofuran
azocyclotin                       carboxin
Bacillus thuringiensis            cartap
benalaxyl                         chloridazon
benfurasate                     ! chlorfenvinphos
benomyl                           chlorfluazuron
bensulfuron-methyl              ! chloropicrin
bentazone                         chlorothalonil
benthiazole (TCMTB)               chlorotoluron
benthiocarb (thiobencarb)         chlorpyrifos


﻿cinmethylin                       flucythrinate
clethodim                         flumetralin
clofentezine                      fluometuron
clomazone (fenoxan)               flurazole
copper hydroxide                  flurecol (flurenol)
copper oxide                      flurenol (flurecol)
copper oxychloride                fluroxypyr
cyanazine                         flusilazole
cycloxydim                        flutriafol
cyfluthrin                        fluvalinate
cymoxanil                         folic acid
cypermethrin                      folpet
cypermethrin high-cis           I fosdifen (phosdiphen)
cyproconazole                     fosetyl-aluminium
cyromazine                        fthalide
cytozyme                          furalaxyl
dalapon                           futalide (fthalide)
dazomet                         ! gana-HCH
deltamethrin                      giberellic acid
diaz-inon                        glufosinate-ammonium
dicamba                           glyphosate
dichlofluanid                   ! haloxyfop-ethoxyethyl
dichlorprop                     ! haloxyfop-methyl
! dichlorvos                       hexaconazole
diclofop-methyl                   hexaflumuron
dicloran                          hexazinone
! dicofol                         ! hydrogen cyanide
dienochlor                        imazapyr
dif enamid (diphenamid)           imazaquin
difenzoquat                       indol butyric acid
diflubenzuron                     iodine
dimethametryn                     ioxynil
dimethipin                        IPB (iprobenfos)
dimethoate                        iprobenfos (IPB)
diniconazole                      iprodione
! dinocap                          isazophos
diphenamid (difenamid)            isoprothiolane
diquat                          I kasugamycin
! disulfoton                        lactofen
diuron                            lamdacyhalothrin
dodemorph acetate                 linuron
edifenphos                      ! magnesium phosphide
endosulfan                      ! malathion
EPTC                              maleic hydrazide
ethephon                          mancozeb
! fenamifos                        maneb
fenarimol                         MCPA
! fenitrothion                    ! mephosfolan
fenoxan (clomazone)               mepiquat chloride
fenoxaprop-ethyl                  metalaxyl
fenthion                          metaldehyde
fentin acetate                    metham (-sodium)
fentin hydroxide                  metazachlor
(trifenyltin hydroxide)         methacrifos
fenvalerate                     ! methamidophos
! flocounafen                       methiocarb
fluazifop-butyl                 ! methowyl
fluazifop-p-butyl               ! methyl bromide


﻿methyl-isothiocyanate            propanil
metolachlor                      propargite
metribuzin                       propiconazole
metsulfuron-methyl               propineb
X mirex                            pyrasulfuron
molinate                         pyrazophos
! monocrotophos                   pyre .hrum
MSMA                             pyridaben
n-decanol                        pyroquilon
n-octanol                        quinchlorac
napropamide                      quizalofop-ethyl
ofurace                          sethoxydim
! omethoate                       sulphur
oxadiazon                        sulprofos
oxadixyl                         TCMTB (benthiazole)
! oxamyl                          teflubenzuron
oxycarboxin                    ! terbufos
! oxydemeton-methyl                terbuthylazine
oxyfluorfen                      terbutryn
paraquat                         tetradifon
I parathion-ethyl                 thiabendazole
! parathion-methyl                 thidiazuron
penconazole                      thiobencarb (benthiocarb)
pendimethalin                    thiocyclam hydrogenoxalate
permethrin                       thiodicarb
phenthoate                       thiometon
! phorate                          thiophanate-methyl
phosalone                        thiram
phosdiphen (fosdifen)            triadimefon
! phosphamidon                     triadimenol
phosphoric acid                  triazophos
phoxim                           trichlorfon
picloram                         triclopyr
piperonyl butoxide               tricyclazole
piperophos                       tridemorph
pirimicarb                       trifenyltin hydroxide
pirimiphos-ethyl                         (fentin hydroxide)
pirimiphos-methyl              ! trifluralin
pretilachlor                     triforine
prochloraz                     ! validamycin A
profenofos                       vernolate
prometryn                        vinclozolin
propamocarb hydrochloride      ? xobetrinil
zineb
Of these pesticide active ingredients there are 705 formulations
registered. Roughly one third are insecticides, one third are
herbicides and one fifth are fungicides.
In addition there are 20 adjuvants (e.g. wetting agents), 5
pheromones and 23 -formulations" of the parasitic wasp
Trichograuna registered.
For a list of recently banned or withdrawn pesticides see Section
2.4.2.


﻿2.3.4. Problems of Pesticide Usage
In 1990 a survey" of smallholder farmers of rice, coffee, maize
and potatoes was carried out by a pesticide company to establish
farmer practice in the handling and use of paraquat. Its main
findings are included below and in the following subsections.
It i-s very likely that they give a good guide to pesticide
handling practice generally on smallholdings.
The survey highlights the importance of programmes to train
farmers in the safe and effective use of pesticides, and
especially in sprayer maintenance, the proper disposal of
pesticide containers and improved pesticide storagelu .,l,1,,z
The agrochemical industry has made a serious effort in this
direction but a great deal more is needed and outside help will
be required.
The survey found that effective literacy rates among smallholders
are higher than might be expected.    Around 75% can fully or
partially read pesticide label text, and of those who were
illiterate or experienced difficulty over 90% had a family member
or other person who normally helped them read labels.
2.3.4.1. Residues in Harvested Crops
No specific data on the scale of this problem have been obtained.
Considering that the standards of pesticide usage generally range
from poor to very bad it may be expected that residues exceeding
internationally-accepted tolerances occur on fresh produce.
Growers pay little or no attention to the need to observe pre-
harvest intervals'0 (PHI's) in the use of pesticides. However
there is no reason to believe that pesticide residues on food
crops pose a significant threat to public health generally.
Growers producing crops for export to the USA, Europe etc. are
well aware of the residue tolerances and take care that they are
not exceeded. They realise that one scare will result in the
loss of the market not only for that crop but for others too.
2.3.4.2. Environmental Hazards
There has in the past been a huge amount of pollution of the
environment, including waterways, with persistent pesticides.
Most of this can be avoided by following good practice with
pesticides"o,"s.1',2a,1
The massive usage of copper oxychloride fungicides in coffee has
undoubtedly led to contamination of soil with copper. In 1989
alone nearly 2.500 te ai were sprayed over a cumulative area of
1.7 m ha. The removal of subsidies on the product by Fedecafe
led to an immediate decline in use to some 300 te ai in 1990.
While not in itself as serious an environmental threat as some
other pesticides, copper has unlimited persistence and its use
on such a massive scale as in the past is undesirable. It is


﻿likely to stabilise at a more moderate level now that the modern,
highly effective fungicides can compete in the marketplace.
Perhaps 50% of all pesticides used in Colombia are applied by
air. This causes two serious problems. First, there is not the
slightest attempt to observe good practice in the avoidance of
watercourses.   Second, there are very high concentrations of
pesticides around airstrips, where the washings from aircraft
spray tanks etc. are allowed to run straight into the nearest
stream. A further matter for concern is the presence of dumps
of old pesticide drums around such sites.
Fortunately DDT is no longer used in Colombian agriculture, and
the organochlorine camphechlor (Toxaphene) was finally banned in
1988. Prior to that sales of camphechlor were running at around
240 te ai per annum.
2.3.4.3. Pesticide Poisonings
There is no formal Poison Control Centre to handle cases of
poisonings, including pesticide-related incidents. Poisonings
are treated as part of the general acute medical emergency scene.
As a result there are no official and reliable statistics on
pesticide poisonings.
However there is an important recent survey of poisoning cases
in  Colombia   during  the  period   1989-199033.   Note  that
"poisonings" does not mean deaths:   please refer to Glossary.
The main findings of this survey were as follows:
*    Of all poisonings from all causes during the period,
40% were attempted suicides.    25% were accidental,
very  largely caused by medicines.      Within this
accidental grouping, occupational accidents accounted
f or only 2%, being due to the mishandling or misuse of
pesticides.
*    The Clinica San Pedro Claver del ISS de Bogota
recorded 1,412 poisonings during the first six months
of 1990.    Of these 298, or just over 21%, were
diagnosed as being due to pesticides (carbamate,
organophosphate and pyretLroid insecticides).   This
can be attributed to the fact that the large flower
growing industry is centred in the region and all its
workforce is registered with the ISS.
*    The private Clinica de Toxicologia Ltda.in Bogota
treated 209 poisoning cases during the ten-month
period July 1989-April 1990.   Of these 7, or 3.4%,
were due to pesticides within the above insecticide
classes.
*    The Centro Asesoramiento Toxicologico "Guillermo Uribe
Cualla" provides a free telephone advisory service to
hospitals and health centres nationally and to non-
medical personnel. During the second half of 1989 it


﻿advised in a total of 69 poisoning cases of which 11
(just under 16%) were due to pesticides -- all
insecticides.   Of these    8 were due to organo-
phosphates  and   3  to  organochlorines/carbamates/
pyrethroids.
*    The   Servicio  de   Respuesta   Inmediaza  provides
toxicological advice by telephone to affiliated
pesticide manufacturers.  During the ten months July
1989 to April 1990 it recorded 20 cases of pesticide
poisonings, all due to insecticides:   12 cases from
organophosphates, 7   from  carbamates  and  1 from
pyrethroids.
*    The Laboratorio de Toxicologia de Urgencias, Instituto
de Medicina Legal, carries out analyses for all State
hospitals, the Servicio Seccional de Salud de BogGta,
and private clinics. During the first six months of
1990 it carried out 942 analyses.   Of these 33, or
3.5%, were for pesticides but only 11 proved positive.
I.e.  the  diagnosis  of   pesticide  poisoning  was
confirmed in only 33% of suspected pesticide cases,
this being 1.16% of all referred cases.
*    In the five years 1983-1988 the Hospital San Vicente
de Paul in Medellin confirmed 9 deaths from paraquat
poisoning.   Of these 8 were suicides.    The single
accidental death was due to paraquat having been
transferred to a nutritional drink bottle and consumed
unintentionally.   None of the deaths was due to
occupational exposure.
*    The Hospital San Juan de Dios in Carmen de Viboral in
the Departamento de Antioquia recorded 102 poisoning
patients in a two and a half year period. Of these 65
were  due to pesticides:      53 to organophosphate
insecticides, 10 to carbamate insecticides.      The
remaining two were due to intake of paraquat by mouth:
1 attempted suicide and 1 accidental, not related to
occupational exposure.
*    In a 20 month period     the Centro de Informacion
Toxicologica del Hospital Universitario del Valle
recorded 149 cases of pesticide poisoning (28% of all
cases). Of these only 1.8% were due to occupational
exposure, the rest being due to accident or attempted
suicide. By far the greatest proportion was due to
organophosphate insecticides, alone or in mixture;
none was due to paraquat.
*    The Servicio Seccional de Salud de Antioquia recorded
illness and death due to pesticides over the 12 year
period up to 1982. The hospitals of the Departamento
recorded  a   total  of   5,618  poisonings  due   to
pesticides. These resulted in 660 deaths, 80% of them
due to organophosphate insecticides.    Another main
agent was a carbamate insecticide commonly used to
control household pests, the principal cause being


﻿attempted suicide. The most affected sections of the
population are males between the ages of 15 and 59
years, and those living in rural areas. The trend is
erratic but shows a considerable reduction in recent
years.
From this survey there is no doubt at all that pesticide-
associated poisonings occur at a level which must give rise to
concern. However accidental poisonings serious enough to cause
hospitalisation are a relatively infrequent occurrence and are
not generally regarded as a serious public health issue.   For
example the National Institute of Hygiene in Bogota do not regard
it as a high priority matter in the context of other public
health problems.
The paraquat user survey30 found that some 10-20% of farmers
reported ill effects from mixing or spraying paraquat. However
in 80% of these cases the effects were minor (not serious enough
to cause cessation of work) and only 12% visited a doctor. Three
individual cases were hospitalised for on average two days, and
all i-dividuals recovered.
it should be said that the Coffee Federation (Fedecafe), and the
Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT) are very
concerned about the threat to human health of pesticide use.
CIAT have highlighted two incidents in three years with paraquat
which they consider serious. However neither of these was fatal
and indeed such reports tend to confirm that the overall problem,
while definitely a matter for concern, is not as great as some
would make out. Nevertheless much more attention should be paid
to farmer training in the safe and effective use of pesticides
and in the use of suitable protective clothing"a11,n,,n


﻿2.3.4.4. Pesticide Resistance
Insecticides
Resistance has been most notable as a problem with the cotton
bollworm Heliothis virescens.    Resistance to organophcsphate
compounds had been present a long time, leading farmers to use
"cocktails- of products such as the widely-used mixture DDT-
methyl parathion-toxaphene.   The pyrethroid insecticides were
first introduced in Colombia in 1977 and quickly achieved a wide
and heavy usage. The pyrethroid manufacturers were well aware
of the need to have sound pesticide management programmes to
preserve the life of these important compounds but by 1985 it was
clear that resistance was present in certain parts of the cotton
area.   It spread and intensified rapidly and is now a major
influence on pesticide selection by farmers.
Dealing with this problem is very difficult, especially in a
marketplace like Colombia, .ut industry and government bodies are
working together to develop and implement a strategy for
resistance management. Growers a.e well aware of the problem and
its dangers and this has led to gradual recognition that
management of cotton pests needs to be on a more integrated basis
than just the use of pesticides.    In practice the problem is
being solved passively: pyrethroids are now very little used on
their own and their share of the market has declined
considerably. Compourds such as thiodicarb (Larvin) and insect
growth regulators such as chlorfluazurcn (Atabron) are increasing
greatly in usage. Nevertheless, if further resistance develop-
ment is Lo be prevented, and the risk of major crop losses
avoided, then a sound pesticide management programme must be
adopted in Colombia.
Fungicides
There is widespread resistance to the group of compounds which
includes benomyl, carbendazim and thiophanate-m-ethyl among the
following diseases:
Venturia inaequalis      apple scab
Cercospora spp.          leaf   spot  diseases   on  e.g.
groundnuts
Penicillium spF.         blue  and   green  moulds  which
damage citrus etc. in store and
where funicides are used as a
post-harvest treatment
In addition to the above group of comrpoands, thiabendazole is
used extensively as a post-harvest treatment to prevent fruit rot
and there are concerns about its continuing efficacy.


﻿Herbicides
There is no significant problem of herbicide resistance in
Colombia.
2.3.4.5. Use of Undesirable Pesticides
On the lists of "Main PestLcides Used- there are no products that
should be regarded as unacceptable to the Bank. However a minor
product whichi falls into this category is the insecticide mirex,
used mainly for control of ants (especially fire ants).
There is one pesticide apparently registered in Colombia of which
no trace can be found in the literature: xobetrinil. Unless
this product can be identified the Bank should not allow its
funds to be used for its procurement.
2.3.4.6. Misuse & Mishandling of Pesticides
While misuse and mishandling of pesticides are commonplace, the
sie-ia:ion is not quite as bad as might be supposed, even among
smallholders.   The paraquat handling survey" produced the
following valuable information which shows that some of the most
dangerous practices are rare or do not occur at all. There is
of course no room for complacency in this area on anyone's part,
and as noted earlier the survey highlighted the urgent need for
more farmer training in the safe and effective use of pesticides.
The survey found that 90% or more of smallholders recognise the
risks from oral toxicity of paraquat. However the remainder were
unaware.
Many farmers wrongly believe the risks in spraying paraquat to
be greater than the risks from handling concentrate.
Nearly all mixing and spraying of paraquat is done by adult
males. Male children under the age of 18 years were found to be
used in less than 2% of cases. Use of wife or daughter was never
recorded.
Other than in the coffee sector, few smallholders measure out
paraquat using calibrated containers.
There ;ere no reports of the use of the hand/forearm to stir
paraquat spray solution.    A stick, or the dilution process
itself, was commonly used.
Contamination of the hands, body and/or eyes occurs in 30-50% of
smallhclders during product mixing. Up to about 20% of them take
no action.


﻿Gloves are eye protection are very rarely worn during mixing:
from 3-19% (gloves) and 2-11% (goggles) according to the crop
sector.
Only 10-17% wash their hands after mixing and before starting to
spray.  A sizeable minority of farmers undertake no cleanup
activities if they stcp to eat, drink, smoke or urinate during
spraying.   However   for the most part they wear adequate
protective clothing for paraquat spraying. Most use general farm
clothing, but many (42%) keep a special set of clothing, and some
have two or even three. Most farmers wash and dry their clothes
before re-use, although in coffee, maize and potatoes many do not
do so.   Most change their clothes and wash completely before
doing other work or recreational activity, amd only a small
minority in each crop sector undertake no personal cleanup.
Most smallholders own their own sprayers, except in rice. The
sprayers are often quite old, e.g. up to 12 years among potato
farmers, and 30-40% of them leak. Plastic bags and shaeting are
commonly used to minimise contamination from this source.
Some 20% of smallholders clear blocked spray nozzles by blowing
through them.
Most smallholders simply throw used pesticide containers away.
Some, mainly in rice areas, resell them and many reuse them; for
the most part this is not for the storage of food or drinking
water though this does occur. The re-use of larger pesticide
containers for such purposes as water transportation is
commonplace.
On the larger farms the containers purchased are the biggest, and
therefore the cheapest, possible. These are then handled and the
pouring, mixing etc. of the products is done by labourers with
no formal training and virtually no protective clothing.
The common practice to mark fields for aerial spraying, e.g. in
cotton, is to use flagmen. Considering the highly toxic nature
of some of the products used this is very dangerous and poisoning
incidents among such labourers occur often.
For good practice to prevent problems due to the misuse and
mishandling of pesticides r-e references 10,11,15,18,19 & 32.


﻿2.3.5- Conclusions on Pesticide Usage
*    With  only  one  exception, pesticides    which  pose
unacceptable risks to human health or the environment
have now been banned.
*    Pesticide poisonings due zo misuse or mishandling are
known to occur among farmers and labourers.     While
serious cases leading to hospitalisation or death are
relatively rare the incidence is still far too high.
*    The standards of pesticide usage range from poor to
very bad, though farmer practice is on average better
than might be feared. The most dangerous practices
either do not occur at all or are extremely rare.
*    Pesticide application generally is poor. This is true
not only for farmers but also for aerial applicators.
*    To overcome the problems of poisonings and poor effect
of products there is a need for farmer training in the
safe and effective use of pesticides.   This need is
urgent and considerable resources will be required.
Although training programmes run by the agrochemical
industry, both for farmers and for aerial applicators,
are excellent, outside support is needed to complement
this effort.
*    Residues on fresh produce occur because farmers ignore
PHI 's.  However the most dangerous products have
recently been restricted and it is unlikely that
residues are a significant threat to public health.
*    Environmental pollution has been very serious in the
past and still continues, though with the banning of
the worst compounds the problem is decreasing rapidly.
*    Pesticide resistance is a serious problem, especially
in cotton.


﻿2.4. Pesticide Regulation
2.4.1. The Existing System
Pesticides are regulated under Decree No. 1843 of 1991 of the
Ministry of Health.
Pesticide registration is the responsibility of the Instituto
Colombiana Agropecuario, ICA. On March 25 1992 ICA promulgated
Resolution No. 992, in implementation of Decree No 1843.
The resolution contains the following main provisions.
Producers/Importers/Exporters
Producers, importers and exporters of pesticides must be
registered with ICA.   To gain registration they must produce
various government certifications and information.   Producers
must have a quality control laboratory, and requirements for the
professional qualification of their management and technicians
are set out. Company registration is for five years renewable
for equal periods, but may be cancelled for non-compliance.
Various obligations on producers and importers are set out, to
ensure supervision of the industry and the quality of products,
including packaging and labelling.   Naming and description of
products is also covered to prevent confusion of end-users.
Obligations on exporters are also set out, though these are
brief.
Licence for Sale
All pesticides sold, produced or imported to Colombia must hold
a Licence for Sale. To obtain this a registered company must
provide information to ICA covering description of the product,
efficacy data, residue data, toxicology data, analytical methods,
information on breakdown in plants, soil and water among others.
The toxicology data are used to obtain the "Toxicological
Concept" of the product. The efficacy data, which must include
trials in Colombia, are used to obtain the 'Efficacy Concept".
A certificate of free sale in the country of origin is required,
or failir], that a certificate of registration or free sale in
other countries.
Various other requirements are set out to ensure adequate control
of Licences for Sale of pesticides.
A licence for Sale is valid for five years, renewable for equal
periods. It can be cancelled if it is judged the product poses
a serious risk to human, plant or animal health or to the
environment, or if it has not demonstrated its efficacy.


﻿Distribution & Storage
Pesticide distribution warehouses/stores must be registered with
ICA. The certifications and other requirements to obtain such
registration are set out, as are the obligations on the sellers.
Experimental & Other Materials
Importation of experimental materials and ingredients for
pesticide production are covered.
Registration
The process of registration of a pesticide has three main steps:
1.   Toxicological evaluation data for the product are
submitted to the Ministry of Health, to obtain the
Toxicological Concept.
2.   Efficacy data from in-country field evaluation are
submitted to ICA, to obtain the Efficacy Concept.
3.   Once the Toxicological and Efficacy Concepts have been
obtained, application is made to ICA for the Licence
for Sale.
Private Importation
Private associations of growers, such as bananeros, flori-
cultores, tabacaleros and others, are allowed under "Plan
Vallejo" to import pesticides for their own use. They are not
allowed to sell them. The main tonnage import by this means is
mineral oil, but leaving that product out the total tonnage of
imports under Plan Vallejo is under 4% of the country's annual
usage.
2.4.2. Restricted or Banned Products
Certain pesticides or usages have in recent years been restricted
or prohibited:
*    DDT was banned in 1986.     The other organochlorine
insecticides aldrin, heptachlor, dieldrin, chlordane
and camphechlor were all banned in 1988.
*    The insecticide chlordimeform was banned in 1988.
*    The fungicide captafol was banned in 1989, dinoseb in
1987 and tebuconazole in 1990.


﻿*    Aerial application of the herbicide paraquat was
banned in 1989.   The purpose of this is to prevent
damage from herbicide drift.
*    In 1991 the Licence to Sell WP and EC formulations of
Lindane (gamma-HCH) was cancelled.    The purpose of
this was to prevent smaliholder 1armers using these
formulations illegally on the foliage of plants in
liquid sprays, since use of gamma-HCH is restricted to
soil  application  only.    The  granular  and  dust
formulations remain licensed, as these cannot be used
other than as soil appplications.
*    In 1991 the uses of parathion products were restricted
on the grounds that their high toxicity, high doses
and frequent applications close to harvest posed a
serious hazard to public and animal health and the
environment; they were being used by non-technified
farmers on a wide range of fruit and vegetable crops
and  tobacco.    It was considered    that   suitable
alternatives were available. Use of parathion-ethyl
was restricted to cotton and pasture and that of
parathion-methyl to cotton and technified rice.
*    Products containing the insecticide fonofos were
banned in 1992 on the grounds that they are extremely
toxic and were being used in enclosed spaces in
ornamental flower production.
*    The  fungicide  binapacryl and   the  soil  fumigant
dichloropropene have recently been banned.
2.4.3. Issues Concerning Pesticide Regulation
With the promulgation of Resolution No. 992 in 1992 Colombia
finally has an excellent, all-embracing law to regulate
pesticides. The Resolution has been drawn up with regard to the
regional programme to harmonise pesticide regulations.      The
essential thing is that the new Resolution should be implemented
fully in practice.
Most of the undesirable pesticides or usages have now been
banned. There remains only one X-rated product, mirex, on the
list of registered pesticides, and this should banned as soon as
possible.


﻿2.5. Pesticide Production
The development of production sites within Colombia has
significantly altered the position regarding trade in agro-
chemicals.  As usual, however, conflicting figures are to be
found.  Colombia has traditionally been a net importer but,
according to one source, in 1990 exports rose to $47m, up 16% on
1989, and for the first time exceeded imports at $41m, down 5%.
Another source claims that the 1989 export figure was $90 m.
These pesZicide exports go to over 24 countries around the world,
including USA, Japan and West European countries.     In Latin
America, Ecuador, Paraguay, Bolivia, Peru, El Salvador, Chile,
Venezuela and Costa Rica import from Colombia. The main exporter
is the American-based multinational DowElanco, which accounts for
over one third of pesticide exports.
The Colombian market is supplied by around 16 companies, of which
four are Colombian-owned. The leading five companies (Hoechst,
DowElanco, Ciba-Geigy, Proficol and Rohm & Haas) account for
around half of the market. Proficol is the only Colombian-owned
company in the above group;    the other three are small and
together account for only 2% of the market.
2.5.1. Producers' Association
The Asociacion Nationale dei Industria (ANDI) is a very strong
organisation and it has its own Agrochemicals Committee. This
is composed of the top managers of all the main pesticide
companies in Colombia, both local and multinational.       The
Committee is thus able to take decisions and to take immediate
action to enforce them.    This Committee does what it can to
maintain high standards of pesticide manufacture and formulation
in the country, and to raise the standards of transportation,
storage, handling and use in the farming community.
There are 14 companies involved in the manufacture or formulation
of pesticides, and five of these are synthesising ai's. Another
31 companies market finished products only.
2.5.2. Manufacture of Active Ingredients
This began in 1964 with synthesis of the fungicides maneb and
mancozeb by Dupont and Rohm & Haas in Baranquilla. In 1973 these
companies began synthesis of the herbicides diuron and propanil.
It was only in 1985 that a Colombian company, Proficol, began
synthesis of propanil.
The following is a list of ai synthesis facilities and their
products in Colombia.


﻿Company        Ownership        Location         Main Products
Rohm & Haas    Multinational    Baranquilla     mancozeb
propani1
Dupont        Multinational    Baranquilla    diuron, propanil
mancozeb
Proficol      Colombian        Bogota         propanil, 2,4-D,
metham-sodium
DowElanco     Multinational    Cartagena      2,4-D, cymoxanil
Invequimica    Colombian        Medellin         2,4-D
2.5.3. Problems with Manufacture of Active Ingredients
Some 80% of the Colombian pesticide market is in the hands of
multinational comianies who, generally speaking, operate to the
highest standards . They are able to influence the operating
standards of the entire market via the Agrochemicals Committee
of ANDI. Thus the Colombian company Proficol is said to operate
to the same standards as the multinationals.
Overall it appears that there is nowadays no special cause Ior
concern over the operation of ai manufacturing plants in
Colombia.
2.5.4. Formulation of Products
This began in Colombia in 1963. Today, all ai's manufactured in
Colombia are formulated locally, normally by the original
manufacturer. There is also a certain amount of formulation of
ai's which have been imported.
There is also a system known as "La Maquila", whereby farmer
associations or firms which do not have their own formulation
facilities import ai's and contract to have them formulated.
The installed formulation capacity of Colombia is estimated at
34,800,000 kg of solid products aid 55,800,000 1 of liquids.
Plant utilisation is believed to Ie around 60% of capacity.
In all 13 companies are formulating their own or other
manufacturers' products in Colombia. The following list includes
the main ones additional to the ai manufacturers listed in
Section 2.5.2:


﻿Company        Ownership        Location         Main Products
BASF           Multinational    Medellin         paraquat
pyrethroid
insecticides
Rhone Poulenc  multinational    Bog-:ta          oxadiazon
Proficol       Colombian        Bogota           glyphosate
methamidophos
and others
Beosan        Colombian       Bogota          A wide range of
products for
othercompanies
Bayer          Multinational    Baranquilla     Granules
Invequimica    Colombian       Medellin        paraquat, 2,4-D
and others
DowElanco      Multinational    Cartagena
Ciba-Geigy     Multinational    Cartagena        metalaxyl
Hoechst        Multinational    Baranquilla     chlorfluazuron
Cali             flutriafol
Shell          Multinational    Baranquilla      DDVP
paraquat
ICI            Multinational    Medellin         brodifacoum
2.5.5. Problems with Formulation of Products
Pesticide formulation, like ai manufacture, is regulated by ICA.
Their standards differ in some respects from those operated by
GIFAPu,22 but they are not necessarily lower and in some cases
they are more restrictive.
One problem area has been pesticide packaging3. The local
packaging industry has not kept up with new developments and this
has led to difficulties with the production of modern pesticide
containers and anti-tamper devices such as seals. In some cases
this has led companies to sell their products in containers
recognised to be unsatisfactory, e.g. paraquat in glass bottles.
However, like many other sectors in Colombia, matters are
improving and a new plant is being installed in 1992 to make PET
(polyethylene tetraphthalate) bottles. PET is one of the major
modern systems of pesticide packaging.


﻿Up until the recent past (in some cases the very recent past)
waste management in many formulation plants has been well below
acceptable standards'-.   In the worst cases, which were not
uncommon, waste disposal systems consisted of pipes to the river
or holes in the ground.      This situation has been largely
rectified and most formulation plants now have proper waste
management facilities of incineration and effluent treatment.
However it is rumoured that some of the Colombian-owned
formulators (not Prof icol) are still operating well below modern
international standards and this is an area which would repay
closer inspection to ensure compliance.
2.5.6. Adulteration and False Labelling
These practices are always present to some extent and from time
to time there is an "outbreak" involving the products of
multinational companies, who take what action they can to stop
them.
The problem is aggravated by the fact that the border with
Venezuela is very open and many Venezuelan products come in to
Colombia.   People sell pesticides on the black market as
Venezualan product when in fact it is adulterated Colombian
material. Venezuelan product has also been found to have been
adulterated: there was a recent case of a pyrethroid insecticide
havinq been reduced from 5% to 4% ai.
The largely illiterate and unsophisticated small-scale peasant
farmers are a particular prey to this activity. The same thing
applies to the large number of cocanistas buying pesticides,
though whether their deception in this regard is a good or a bad
thing is arguable.


﻿2.6. Distribution, Transportation & Storage of Pesticides
The national growers' associations provide a distribution service
for each of their particular crops. The associations include
Fedecafe (coffee), Federalgodon (cotton) and Fedearroz (rice).
The multinational pesticide companies do a good jcb of
transporting   their   products   from   their   premises   to
distributors,". However from distributor level downwards and in
the shops the level of practice is often bad. For example it is
not uncommon to find highly toxic pesticides being transported,
stored and offered for sale next to foodstuffs. Naturally the
multinationals do what they can to ensure that their products are
transported, handled and stored as safely as possble but they
cannot control the further ends of the distribution chain8.
Storage of pesticides on farms is in general reasonable.
Pesticides are a tradeable commodity and consequently, for sake
of their value not for safety reasons, larger farms tend to keep
them in lockable stores.
Most smallholders buy the smallest bottles available, e.g. 100-
250 ml bottles of insecticide, and thus do not store large
quantities;   this is fortunate because many such farmers have
little idea of safe storage conditions.   Furthermore they buy
pesticides as needed and do not keep stock. Among those that do,
especially in the coffee and potato sectors, quite a high
proportion store pesticides in an outside shed or store which is
locked.


﻿2.7. Crop/Pest/Pesticide Analysis
For the meaning of the symbols "!" and -X" see Section 3.3.3.
Dollar values are at first distributor buying level, i.e. ex-
manufacturer price for local production, CIF for imports.
2.7.1. Potatoes
Area fluctuates, about 115,000 ha.
A wide range of cultivars is grown, and the yield varies greatly
according to the cultivar. However, figures of 14-15 te/ha are
quoted.
1990 value all pesticides $25.7m.
Potato Insecticides
Foliar feeding insects affect the whole area.   110,000 ha are
treated with 4-5 spray rounds.
"White grub", Premnotrypes vorax, is treated on 110,000 ha with
2 applications. Other soil insects are treated on around 32,000
ha with I application.
1990 value $10.7m.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Myzus persicae                         chlorpyrifos
Thrips tabaci                          cyfluthrin
Liriowyza spp.                         cypermethrin
deltamethrin
Epitrix spp.                           diazinon
dimethoate
! fenitrothion
lamdacyhalothrin
! methamidophos
I methomyl
! monocrotophos
! parathion-ethyl
! parathion-methyl
phosphamidon
profenofos
trichlorfon
Agrotis spp.                           chlorpyrifos
Ancognatha scarabaeioides            I gamma-HCH
trichlorfon
Premnotrypes vorax                   ! aldicarb
! carbofuran
! phorate


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
! methamidophos           Monitor 60 EC     103      140,000
! carbofuran              Furadan 33 SC     117       124,000
dimethoate             Systemin 40 EC      36        89,000
! methomyl                Lannate 90 SP      18       80,000
deltamethrin             Decis 2.5 EC       0.54     67,000
! parathion-methyl        various 48 EC      31       66,000
! parathion-ethyl         various 48 EC      29       40,000
profenofos             Curacron 50 EC      23        36,000
Potato Fungicides
Bacterial and fungal diseases affect the whole area. Most of it
is treated, up to 14 times.
1990 value $15m.
Main Diseases                    Pesticides Used
Phytophthora infestans             benomy1
Alternaria solani                  copper
copper oxychloride
cymoxanil
fentin hydroxide
ferric ferrous cyanide
mancozeb
maneb
meta.laxyl
propineb
Puccinia pitteriana                copper oxychloride
oxycarboxin
propiconazole
continued....


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
mancozeb            Manzate 200 80 WP     2,799    1,166,000
maneb              Dithane M-22 80 WP       657      274,000
fentin hydroxide      Brestanid 50 SC       31      123,000
cymoxanil +           Curzate M 72 WP       96       67,000
mancozeb
copper oxychloride      various 40 WP        57       57,000
Potato Herbicides
Weeds affect around 60,000 ha.   Most of this is treatable but
only some 10,000 ha are treated, with on average 1.5
applications.
1990 value around $0.25m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Brachiaria spp.                         linuron
Digitaria spp.                         metribuzin
Echinochloa crus-galli                 paraquat
Panicum spp.                            prometryn
Setaria spp.
Ama-ranthus spp.
Brassica spp.
Chenopodi um spp.
Galium aparine
Portulaca oleracea
Raphanus spp.
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
prometryn              Gesagard 50 FL      6.3      5,000
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL      1.0      5,000
linuron                  Afalon 47 WP      2.4      2,500
metribuzin               Sencor 35 WP      1.7      2,500


﻿2.7.2. Various Vegetables
Area about 110,000 ha, including tomatoes.
On the wide range of vegetable crops there is a very wide range
of pests, and the individual species are therefore not listed
here.
1990 value all pesticides $10.5m.
Vegetable Insecticides
1990 value $4.1m.
Insecticides Used
abamectin                           lamdacyhalothrin
Bacillus thuringiensis             ! malathion
! carbaryl                          ! methamidophos
! carbofuran                        ! methomvl
chlorpyrifos                       ! monocrotophos
cyfluthrin                         ! parathion-ethyl
cypermethrin                       ! parathion-methyl
deltamethrin                         phosalone
diazinon                           ! phospnamidon
diflubenzuron                        phoxim
dimethoate                           profenofos
endosulfan                           thiocyclam.
fluvalinate                         thiometon
! gamma-HCH                           trichlorfon
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
! methamidophos           1amaron 60 EC      38        --
dimethoate              various 40 EC      23         --
! malathion               various 60 EC      20         --
! carbaryl                  Sevin 80 WP      20         --
trichlorfon             various 80 SP      19
parathion-methyl        various 48 EC      16         --
carbofuran              Furadan 33 SC      11         --
profenofos             Curacron 50 EC      10         --
! methomyl               various EC, SP       8         --
! gamma-HCH                   various D       7         --


﻿Vegetable Fungicides
1990 value S5m.
Pungicides Used
benomyl                          fentin hydroxide
bitertanol                       mancozeb
carbendazim                      metalaxyl
chlorothalonil                   oxycarboxin
copper hydroxide                 propamocarb
copper oxychloride               propineb
cymoxanil                        sulphur
dichlof luanid                    thiophenate-methyl
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
mancozeb            Manzate 200 80 WP      672
propineb               Antracol 70 WP       56       --
Vegetable Herbicides
1990 value $1.4m.
Herbicides Used
diuron                               metribuzin
fluazifop-p-butyl                    oxyfluorfen
glyphosate                           paraquat
linuron                              prometryn
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL      34         --
glyphosate              Roundup 36 SL      12         --
Vegetable Seed Dressings
The main proauct used is Vitavax 300 40 WP (captan + carboxin)
to a value of some $50,000 per annum.


﻿2.7.3. Maize
Area around 700,000 ha, including 80,000 ha of commercially grown
maize. Yield on smallholdings about 1.4 te/ha;    yield on the
commercially grown maize 2.8 te/ha.
There is no significant usage of fungicides in maize.
1990 value all pesticides $3.fm.
Maize Insecticides
Insects affect 44,000 ha of the commercially grown maize, which
is treated on average once.
1990 value $450,000.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Spodoptera spp.                     chlorpyrifos
Agrotis ipsilon
Spodoptera spp.                     acephate
Mocis spp.                        ! carbaryl
Heliothis zea                       chlorpyrifos
Diatraea spp.                     ! methomyl
Epitrix spp.                      I monocrotophos
triazophos
trichlorfon
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
methomyl               Nudrin 21.6 EC      4.5      17,000
chlorpyrifos +     Hostathion 38.4 EC      3.5       9,000
triazophos
chlorpyrifos            Lorsban 48 EC      3.6       6,000


﻿Maize Weeds
Weeds affect all 80,000 ha of the commercially grown maize. All
treatable, ali treated with on average about 2 applications.
1990 value $1.3m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Brachiaria spp.                        2,4-D
Cynodon dactylon                     ! atrazine
Cyperus spp.                          dichlormid
Digitaria spp.                         EPTC
Eleusine indica                      ! paraquat
Paspalum spp.                          pendimethalin
Rottboellia exaltata
Setaria geniculata
Sorghum halepense
Amaranthus spp.
Ipomoea spp.
Portulaca oleracea
Raphanus sativus
Solanum nigrum
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (hal
2,4-D                     Ankil 40 EC      40       90,000
! atrazine          various EC, FL, WP       73      46,000
! paraquat             Graimoxone 20 SL      11      27,000
Maize Seed Dressings
Around 1,500 te of maize seed seed treated annually. The range
of diseases is the same as that for wheat and barley (see Section
2.7.6) with the addition of Rhyncosporium spp.).
1990 value $17,000.
The product used is captan + carboxin (Vitavax 300 40 WP): 0.9
te ai.


﻿2.7.4. Rice
Area 350,000 ha. Yields have risen steadiy to around 4.9 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $60m.
Rice Insecticides
Insects affect all 350,000 ha. Most of it is treatable and most
is treated with 3-4 applications.
1990 value $1Lm.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Agrotis ipsilon                       acephate
Eutheola bidentata                   ! carbofuran
Gryllotalpa hexadactyla               chlorpyrifos
Spodoptera frugiperda                 cypermethrin
diazinon
fenvalerate
! gamma-HCH
lamdacyhalothrin
! parathion-methyl
triazophos
trichlorfon
Sogatodes oryzicola                  ! carberyl
Blissus leucopterus                  ! dicrotophos
dimethoate
! monocrotophos
! phosphamidon
thiometon
triclorfon
Spodoptera frugiperda                 acephate
Hydrellia griseola                   ! carbofuran
Diatraea spp.                          chlorpyrifos
cyfluthrin
cypermethrin
deltamethrin
! dicrotophos
diflubenzuron
fenthion
fenvalerate
lamdacyhalothrin
! methamidophos
! methomyl
! monocrotophos
triflumuron
triazophos
In addition to the above pests the rice water weevil, Lissor-
rhoptrus oryzophilus, occurs in some areas. There is very little
usage of insecticides in its control, which is done by raising
water levels.


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
! monocrotophos          various 60 EC     192        320,000
chlorpyrifos           Lorsban 48 EC      87        162,000
cypermethrin               various EC      8.4       117,000
dimethoate              various 40 EC      66        111,000
! phosphamidon        Dimecron 96.5 EC      48         71,000
! carbofuran             various G, SC      41         64,000
! parathion-     Metil Parathion 48 EC      25         50,000
methyl
! methomyl              Methavim 90 SP      10.3       43,000
! gamma-HCH                  various D      15.7       31,000


﻿Rice Fungicides
Fungal and bacterial diseases affect the whole 350,000 ha and it
is all treatable. The number of applications varies with the
disease problem but all the rice is treated several times.
1990 value ci2m.
Main Diseases                   Pesticides Used
Pyricularia oryzae                  benomyl
! blasticidin-S
diniconazole
edifenphos
fthalide
iprobenfos
isoprothiolane
I kasugamycin
mancozeb
phosdiphen
prochloraz
pyroquilon
tricyclazole
Rhizoctonia solani                  carbendazim
propineb
thiabendazole
I validamycin
Cercospora oryzae                   benomyl
Helmin thospori um oryzae           carbendazim
Rhynchosporium spp.                 diclofluanid
fentin hydroxide
iprodione
mancozeb
propicona zole
.thiophanate-methyl
triadimefon
Note:     Importation of the "X-rated* fungicide captafol was
banned in 1989.   In 1990 it was being used up from
stock and when this is finished its use will cease.
The 1990 usage was 16 te ai over 13,000 ha.
continued... .


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
mancozeb               various WP, FL     724      380,000
tricyclazole                Bio 75 WP     24      128,000
carbendazim            various WP, SC      32      124,000
edifenphos              Hinosan 50 EC      77      103,000
benomy!                 Benlate 50 WP      11       70,000
iprobenfos              Kitazin 48 EC      49       69,000
validamycin            Validacin 3 LS       2       35,000
Rice Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole rice area; all treatable, all treated.
Each hectare receives on average nearly 2.5 appplications.
1990 value $37m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Echinochloa spp.                     2,4-D
Eleusine indica                      bentazone
Leptochloa spp.                      bifenox
Panicum spp.                         butachlor
Cyperus spp.                         dimethametryn
fenoxaprop-ethyl
Aneilema nadiflorum                 flurecol-butyl
Cassia tora                          glyphosate
Desmodium tortuosum                ! haloxyfop-
Euphorbia spp.                             ethoxyethyl
Ipomoea sPP.                         ioxynil
Mimosa pudi ca                       linuron
MCPA
metsulfuron-methyl
molinate
MSMA
oxadiazon
oxyfluorfen
I paraquat
pendimethalin
picloram
piperophos
propanil
quinclorac
quizalofop-ethyl
thiobencarb
trifluralin
continued....


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (hal
propanil                    various EC     1,082      283,000
2,4-D                       various EC        99      256,000
2,4-D + ioxynil           Actril 70 DS        54      185,000
butachlor                Machete 60 EC       377      177,000
oxadiazon                Ronstar 40 FL       107      120,000
fenoxaprop-ethyl          Furore 12 EC        14      100,000
pendimethalin              Prowl 33 EC       126       94,000
paraquat               Gramoxone 20 SL        60       75,000
bentazone               Basagran 48 EC        69       72,000
glyphosate             Roundup 35.9 SL        98       68,000
metsulfuron-methyl          Ally 60 DF         0.54    60,000


﻿2.7.5. Sorghum
Area around 200,000 ha.   Average yields have been gradually
increasing, from 2.5 te/ha in 1985 to 2.9 te/ha in 1990.
1990 value all pesticides S11m.
Sorghum Insecticides
Soil insects affect about 150,000 ha;   100,000 ha of this is
treatable but only 9,000 ha are treated, with one application.
Foliage and seed-head pests affect the whole area;    most is
treatable and al1 this treatable area receives on average 2.5
applications.
Sucking pests (aphids) affect only about 70,000 ha. Some 50,000
ha of this is treatable and 30,000 ha are treated, once.
1990 value about $5m.
Main Insect Pests                Insecticides Used
Spodoptera spp.                       chlorpyrifos
Agrotis ipsilon                     ! gamma-HCH
! mephosfolan
trichlorfon
Spodoptera spp.                      acephate
Contarinia sorghicola               ! carbaryl
Heliothis zea                         chlorpyrifos
cypermethrin
diazinon
diflubenzuron
dimethoate
deltamethrin
fenvalerate
lamdacyhalothrin
! methamidophos
! methomyl
! monocrotophos
! parathion-ethyl
profenofos
thiodicarb
triazophos
trichlorfon
triflumuron
Aphids                                dimethoate
! monocrotophos
continued....


﻿Sorghum Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area; all treatable, all treated with at
least one application (the average is 1.6 applications).
1990 value $5m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Brachiaria spp.                       2,4-D
Cyperus rotundus                    ! atrazine
Cynodon dactylon                     metolachlor
Digitaria spp.                      ! paraquat
Echinochloa colonum                 pendimethalin
Eleusine indica
Paspal um spp.
Amaranthus spp.
Ipomoea spp.
Portulaca oleracea
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
atrazine               various WP, FL      340       212,000
metolachlor                Dual 96 EC      125        65,000
pendimethalin             Prowl 33 EC       30        26,000
Sorghum Seed Treatments
Around 4,500 of sorghum seed are treated annually. The range of
diseases is the same as that for wheat and barley (see Section
2.7.6) with the addition of Rhyncosporium spp.).
1990 value $17,000.
The product used is captan + carboxin as Vitavax 300 40 WP: 2.7
te ai.


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
methomyl               various EC, SP      51       197,000
chlorpyrifos            Lorstan 48 EC      94       156,000
dimethoate              various 40 EC      13        32,000
monocrotophos           various 60 EC      18        30,000
Sorghum Fungicides
Diseases affect 110,000 ha. All of this is treatable but only
about 70,000 ha are treated, with just under 2 applications on
average.
1990 value $1.5-.
Main Diseases                    Pesticides Used
Colletotrichum spp.                   benomyl
Gloeocercospora spp.                X captafol
Puccinia spp.                         carbendazim.
mancozeb
propineb
thiabendazole
triadimefon
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
mancozeb                various 80 WP       92       46,000
carbendazim         various 50 WP, SC       10       40,000
thiabendazole           Mertect 60 WP        5       30,000


﻿2.7.6. Cereals
This category includes:
Wheat area 40,000 ha; yield 1.7-1.9 te/ha.
Barley area 40-50,000 ha; yield around 1.9 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $1.6m.
Cereal Insecticides
Aphids (Myzus spp.) affect about half the cereal area.    Some
30,000 ha area treatable, 18,000 ha treated with one application,
though a small proportion may be treated twice.
1990 value $222,000.
The main insecticides used are dimethoate 40 EC and ! metham-
idophos 60 EC, with a small amount of ! phosphamidon 96.5 EC.
Cereal Fungicides
Fungal diseases affect 60,000 ha;    42,005 ha treatable, all
treated.
1990 value $786,000.
Main Diseases                    Fungicides Used
Puccinia recondita                     flusilazol
Puccinia striiformis                  mancozeb
Puccinia hordei                        propiconazole
Rhynchosporium spp.                    triadimefon
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cam. Area (hal
mancozeb           Dithane M-45 80 WP     66         41,000
propiconazole              Tilt 25 EC      1.8       14,000


﻿Cereal Herbicides
Weeds affect virtually the whole area of both wheat and barley
and it is all treatable.    However only about 29,000 ha are
treated at all;   most of this receives just one application,
though a small proportion is treated twice.
1990 value $604,000.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Various grasses                        2,4-D
dicamba
plus:                           diclofop-methyl
metribuzin
Solanum torvum                        pendimethalin
Raphanus raphanistrum
Brassica spp.
Chenopodiun paniculatum
Galinsoga ciliata
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
2,4-D                   various 48 EC    15          21,000
metribuzin               Sencor 35 WP      1.4        7,000
Cereal Seed Dressings
About 1,300 te of wheat and 1,000 te of barley are treated with
seed dressings against bacterial and fungal diseases.
1990 value $25,000.
Main Diseases                    Pesticides Used
Helminthosporium spp.                     captan
Puccinia spp.                           carboxin
Rhizoctonia spp.
Tilletia spp.
Ustilago spp.
The product used is a mixture of captan + carboxin (Vitavax 300
40 WP): 1.4 te ai.


﻿Cereal Storage Insecticides
Harvested cereals are protected from insect attack with
insecticides.
1990 value $800,000.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Araecerus fasciculatus              ! aluminium phosphide
Cryptolestes ferrugineus           ! dichlorvos
Oryzaephilus surinamensis            pirimiphos-methyl
Plodia interpunctella                pyrethrum
Rhizopertha dominica
Sitophilus oryzae
Sitophilus granarius
Sitotroga cerealella
Tribolium confusum
The products and formulations used are:
ai                      Main Formulation
! aluminium phosphide        Phostoxin 57.3 T
pyrethrum                     Pibutrin 600 D
! dichlorvos                       Nogos 50 EC
pirimiphos-methyl             Actellic 50 EC


﻿2.7.7. Bananas
Area 25,000 ha. Yield around 45 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $10m.
There is no significant usage of insecticides.
Banana Nematicides
Nematodes (eelworms) affect 5,000 ha. All treatable, around
1,300 ha treated, with 1 application.
1990 value around $220,000.
Main Nematode Pests                Nematicides Used
Radopholus similis                   ! aldicarb
Pratylenchus sp.                     ! carbofuran
Heloidogyne spp.
Helicotylenchus sp.                  ! ethoprofos
The main product used is aldicarb as Temik 15 G: 3 te at over
1,000 ha.
Banana Fungicides
Fungal diseases affect the whole area;     all treatable, all
treated, with about 20 applications.
By far the most important disease is Sigatoka, caused by
Mycospbaerella spp.
1990 value $7.3m. This figure excludes the value of products
imported directly by the banana companies and which do not
therefore enter the domestic Colombian pesticide market.
Main Diseases                    Fungicides Used
Cercospora musae                       benomyl
Mycosphaerella fijiensis               chlorothalonil
Mycosphaerella musicola                mancozeb
var. diff or-mis             mineral oil
propiconazole
thiabendazole
thiophanate-methyl
tridemorph
continued....


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (haI
mancozeb                various FL, WP        754     387,000
mineral oil                     80 Oil      1,248     208,000
propiconazole               Tilt 25 EC         18     176,000
benomvl             Benlate 50 FL & WP         22     158,000
tridemorph               Calixin 75 EC        64     143,000
chlorothalonil             Bravo 50 FL       100      57,000
Banana Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area; all treatable, all treated, with
5-6 applications.
1990 value $3m.
Main Weeds                      Herbicides Used
Digitaria sanguinalis                    ametryn
Eleusine indica                          diuron
Echinochloa crus-g3lli                   glyphosate
Paspalu fasciculatum                   ! paraquat
Setaria geniculata
Bidens pilosa
Commelina diffusa
Ipomoea hirta
Portulaca oleracea
Scleria pterota
Sida acuta
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL        48       120,000
glyphosate            Roundup 35.9 SL        34        27,000


﻿2.7.8. Various Fruit Crops
There are nearly 50,000 ha of fruits such as grapes, citrus,
mangoes, guavas, avocados etc.
1990 value all pesticides $1.8m.
Fruit Insecticides
Various insect pests affect around 34,000 ha.
1990 value $689,000.
Insecticides Used
! carbaryl
diazinon
! malathion
! methomyl
mineral oil
phosalone
Pruit Fungicides
Various diseases affect around 20,000 ha.
1990 value $400,000
Fungicides Used
benomyl
carbendazim
copper oxychloride
fosetyl-aluminium
mancozeb
metalaxyl
thiophanate-methyl
Fruit Herbicides
Weeds affect most of the area: around 40,000 ha.
1990 value $690,000.
Herbicides Used
ametryn
bromacil
diuron
glufosinate-ammonium
glyphosate
paraquat


﻿2-7.9. Coffee
Area around 1. lm ha.  Yield 0.7-0.8 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides S6.6m.
Coffee Nematicides & Insecticides
Nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) affect a small proportion of the
area and are treated on only about 1,000 ha.
Leaf cutting ants (Atta spp.) are treated on 11,000 ha and other
insects on about 20,000 ha.
1990 value $m.
Main Pests                      Pesticides Used
Meloidogyne incognita                ! carbofuran
Meloidogyne javanica
Atta spp.                             ! carbaryl
chlorpyrifos
phoxim
Leucoptera coffeella                  ! dicrotophos
dimethoate
! disulfoton
fenthion
! phosphamidon
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
dimethoate              various 40 EC       7.8       13,000
chlorpyrifos            Lorsban 2.5 D      10         10,000
phosphamidon         Dimecron 96.5 EC       4.6        6,000


﻿Coffee Fungicides
Rust disease, Hemileia vastatrix, affects 630,000 ha;  550,000
treatable, 510,000 treated, mostly with 2-3 applications.
Coffee berry disease, Cercospora coffeicola, affects 100,000 ha;
all treatable, 70,000 ha tzeated, with nearly 2 applications on
average.
1990 value $1.4m.
Main Diseases                    Fungicides Used
Hemileia vastatrix                  copper hydroxide
copper oxychloride
propiconazole
triadimefon
Cercospora coffeicola               benomyl
carbendazim
dichlofluanid
mancozeb
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
copper oxychloride         various WP    2,283      1,522,000
mancozeb                various 80 WP       112        70,000
benomyl                 Benlate 50 WP         5        32,000
carbendazim             Derosal 50 WP         4        26,000
Note: Copper oxychloride was formerly supplied free of charge
to growers by the Coffee Federation. This subsidy has now been
withdrawn and a survey has shown that 86% of coffee growers use
less as a result; 8% claimed to use more and 6% said they used
about the same. This diminution has significant implications for
environmental contamination (see Section 2.3.4.2).


﻿Coffee Herbicides
Weeds affect 600,000 ha; 450,000 treatable, only 75,000 treated,
with a little over I application on average.
1990 value $4m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Digitaria sanguinalis                   diuron
Cyperus rotundus                        glyphosate
Echinochloa crus-galli                  oxyfluorfen
Paspalum fasciculatum                 ! paraquat
Setaria geniculata
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
glyphosate            Roundup 35.9 SL      80       50,000
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL      28       35,000
diuron                   Karmex 80 WP       14       9,000
oxyfluorfen                Goal 24 EC        3       8,000
diuron + paraquat      Gramocil 30 EC        5       5,000


﻿2.7.10. Oil Palm
The area has been increasing in recent years, to around 105,000
ha. Yields have also risen, to a little over 3 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $1.4m.
There is no significant usage of fungicides in oil palm.
Oil Palm Insecticides
Insects affect 60,000 ha and it is all treatable. Broad spectrum
insecticides are generally applied as spot tzeatments or through
injection to the roots and consequently the treated area cannot
be calculated accurately, but about half the affected area is
treated.
1990 value $418,000.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Leptopharsa gibbicarina             Bacillus thuringiensis
diflubenzuron
! monocrotophos
triflumuron
Rhyncophorus palmarum               Bacillus thuringiensis
! methomyl
trichlorfon
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
monocrotophos           various 60 EC      15        N/A
trichlorfon            Dipterex 80 SP       3        N/A
Bacillus thuringiensis        various       ?       9,000


﻿Oil Palm Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area; all treatable, about half treated,
with on average 1.5 applications.
1990 value $lm.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Brachiaria decumbens                 ametryn
Cyperus rotundus                     diuron
Panicum maximum                      glyphosate
Paspalum fasciculatum               ! haloxyfop-methyl
Rottboellia exaltata                 MSMA
Sorghum halepense                    oxyfluorfen
paraquat
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL      14       18,000
glyphosate            Roundup 35.9 SL      15       14,000
diuron                   Karmex 80 WP      24        7,400


﻿2.7.11. Cotton
The productivity and profitability of the cotton crop are rather
variable, being influenced by problems in controlling pests.
Area up to about 240,000 though it can be 15-25,000 ha less than
ttis in some years. Yield 1.5-1.8 te seed cotton per hectre.
There is no usage of foliar fungicides in cotton.
1990 value all pesticides $43m.
Cotton Insecticides
Insects and mites affect the whole area;    all treatable, all
treated, with an average 15 applications.
The most serious pests are the boll weevil Anthonomus grandis,
which spread into Colombia in 1946, and the bollworm Heliothis
virescens, which has developed resistance to the pyrethroid
insecticides (see Section 2.3.4.4). An average 3.3 applications
are made against Heliothis alone.
1990 value $33m.
Main Insect & Mite Pests              Pesticides Used
Agrotis ipsilon                     acephate
Fel tia subterranea               ! carbofuran
Gryllotalpa hexadactyla             chlorpyrifos
Spodoptera frugiperda             ! ganma-HCH
trichlorfon
Tetranychus spp.                   abamectin
Mononychellus planki                propargite
tetradifon
Aphis gossypii                      dimethoate
! monocrotophos
! phosphamidon
thiometon
Alabama argillacea                  Bacillus thuringiensis
diflubenzuron
! phosphanidon
teflubenzuron
trichlorfon
triflumuron
continued....


﻿Main Insect & Mite Pests             Pesticides Used
... cont-inued
Anthonomus grandis                     cyfluthrin
! dicrotophos
endosulfan
! malathion
! monocrotophos
! parathion-methyl
Sacadodes pyralis                      acephate
Pectinophora gossypiella             ! carbaryl
Heliothis virescens                    chlorpyrifos
Spodcptera frugiperda                  cyfluthrin
cypermethtrin
diflubenzuron
dimethoate
fenvalerate
flucythrinate
lamdacyhalothrin
! malathion
! methamidophos
! methomyl
! monocrotophos
! parathion-methyl
profenofos
thiodicarb
triazophos
trichlorfon


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
! parathion-methyl       various 48 EC     854      890,000
endosulfan             various 35 EC     187       357,000
! methomyl              various EC, SP      49      205,000
cypermethrin              various EC      16.2     165,000
! monocrotophos          various 60 EC      93      161,000
thiodicarb            Larvin 37.5 EC      73       150,000
fenvalerate               various EC       9.7      70,000
profenofos            Curacron 50 EC      40        53,000
cypermethrin +       Fenom C 42.5 EC      33        51,000
profenofos
diflubenzuron           Dim-ilin 25 WP     4        48,000
! malathion                      60 EC      55       45,000
! carbaryl              various WP, FL      76        39,000
Note:    Usage of pyrethroids, e.g. cypermethrin, has been
declining rapidly due to resistance in Heliothis virescens.
Their usage is now largely in tank-mix with other insecticides
such as profenofos.


﻿Cotton Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area; all treatable, all treated with
pre-emergence and post-emergence herbicides. In addition about
30,000 ha are treated pre-planting with glyphosate and about
90,000 ha receive a pre-planting incorporated treatment.
1990 value $10m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Cenchrus brownii                    alachlor
Cenchrus echinatus                  cycloxydim
Cyperus spp.                        diuron
Eleusine indica                      fenoxaprop-ethyl
Panicum maximum                      fluazifop-p-butyl
Rottboelia exaltata                  fluometuron
Setaria spp.                         glufosinate-ammonium
glyphosate
Amaranthus viridis                  metolachlor
Boerhaavia erecta                   MSMA
Cassia tora                        ! paraquat
Desmodium tortuosum                  pendimethalin
Euphorbia brasiliensis               prometryn
Ipom<ea spp.                        quizalofop-ethyl
Portulaca oleracea                   sethoxydim
Tribulus cistoides                 ! trifluralin
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
diuron                   Karmex 80 WP       97      132,000
! trifluralin             various 48 EC      118      71,000
fluometuron             various 50 FL       68       68,000
MSR4A              Ansar 529 HC 72 EC      130       60,000
metolachlor                Dual 96 EC       86       45,000
alachlor                   Lazo 48 EC       79       41,000
glyphosate            Roundup 35.9 SL       39       31,000
! paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL       19       24,000


﻿2.7.12. Ornamental Flowers
Area 3,500 ha.
1990 value all pesticides $8.8m.
Ornamentals Insecticides, Acaricides & Nematicides
Insects, mites & nematodes affect the whole area, which is all
treated with numercus applications.
1990 value $3.9m.
Pesticides Used
abamectin                        fluvalinata
! aldicarb                       ! gamma-HCH
amitraz                          lamdacyhalothrin
bromopropylate                 ! malathion
clofentezine                   ! methomyl
cyfluthrin                     ! monocrotophos
cypermethrin                   ! oxamyl
cyromazine                       permethria
deltamethrin                   ! phosphamidon
diazinon                         pirimicarb
! dicofol                          profenofos
dienochlor                       propargite
! disulfoton                       tetradifon
endosulfan                       thiocyclam
! ethoprofos                       thiometon
fenvalerate


﻿Ornamentals Fungicides
Most of the area is affected by various diseases, and many of the
crops are treated with numerous applications.
1990 value $4.9m.
Pesticides Used
benomyl                           oxycarboxin
bitertanol                        penconazole
captan                            prochloraz
carbendazim                       propamocarb
chlorothalonil                    propineb
dichlofluanid                     pyrazofos
fosetyl-aluminium                 sulfur
furalaxyl                         thiabendazole
iprodione                         thiophanate-methyl
mancozeb                          triadimef on
metalaxyl                         triforine
vinclozolin
Ornamental Herbicides
There is a small amount of herbicide use.
1990 value $100,000.
The main products used are oxadiazon and oxyfluorfen.


﻿27.13. Pasture
There are said to be 40 a ha of pasture but only abo- 5 m ha of
this could be described as managed pasture.          lough no
insecticides or fungicides are used chere is a larx   count of
herbicide use on this managed area.
Pasture Herbicides
A wide range of grasses, sedges and broad-leaved weeds affect
pasture on all 5 m ha.   Only about 2 in ha are treatable, and
about 1.5 m ha are treated with herbicides, often as spot
treatments-
1990 value $20m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Andropogon bicornis                  glyphosate
Canchrus brownii                 ! paraquat
Cyperus spp.
Paspaluw virgatum
Amaranthus spp.                      2 ,4-D
Bidens pilosa                       dicamba
Boerhaavia spp.                     dichlorprop
Cassia tora                         hexazinone
Cucumis melo                        metsulfuron-methyl
Desmodiuum spp.                      picloram
Eupatorium spp.
Heliconia spp.
Ipoaoea spp.
Ma tra spp.
Mormordica charantia
Phaseolus lathyroides
Portulaca cleracea
Rumex crispus
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha I
2,4-D + picloram           various EC      781      693,000
2,4-D                      various EC      495      304,000
2,4-D + dichlorprop        various EC      124       70,000
metsulfuron-methyl         Ally 60 DF        1       50,000


﻿2.7.14. Soya
1990 area 120.009 ha but after the withdrawal of tariff
protection in 1990 the area shrank to 35,000 ha by 1992. Yield
1.9-2.0 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $8m.
Soya Insecticides
Insects affect the whole area; all treatable, and most of it is
treated, with two or more applications.
1990 value $1.7m.
Main Insect Pests                 Ins2cticides Used
Agrotis ipsilon                    trichlorfon
Spodoptera frugiperda
Anticarsia gemmatalis              Bacillus thuringiensis
Spodoptera frugiperda              chlorpyrifos
Heliothis virescens                cypermethrin
Maruca testulalis                  deltamethrin
diflubenzuron
dimethoate
endosulfan
lamdacyhalothrin
! methamidophos
! methomyl
! monocrotophos
! parathion-methyl
profenofos
thiodicarb
Cerotoma ruflicornis             ! parathion-methyl
Diabrotica sp.                     trichlorfon
Nezaxa viridula                    dimethoate
Piezodorus guildingi               endosulfan
Thyanta spp.                     ! methamidophos
! monocrotophos
I phosphamidon
continued....


﻿Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
endosulfan              Thiodan 35 EC       20        37,000
! monocrotophos           various 60 EC      21        35,000
dimethoate              various 40 EC        7        18,000
! methamidophos    various 60 EC, 60 SL      10        17,000
! methomyl               various EC, SP       5        17,000
trichlorfon             various 80 SP       9        11,000
chlorpyrifos         Lorsban 4E 48 EC       5         10,000
Soya Fungicides
Diseases affect about half the area; around 35,000 ha treatable,
around 20,000 ha treated, some of it more than once.
1990 value $310,000.
Main Diseases                    Fungicides Used
Colletotrichum spp.                benomyl
Cercospora spp.                    mancozeb
thiophanate-methyl
By far the most widely used product is benomyl:     10 te ai as
Benlate 50 WP over 20,000 ha.


﻿Soya Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area;  all treatable, all treated, with
nearly three applications on average.
1990 value $6m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Brachiaria spp.                   acifluorfen
Cynodon dactylon                  alachlor
Digitaria spp.                    bentazone
Eleusine indica                   butachlor
Echinochloa spp.                  fenoxaprop-ethyl
Panicum spp.                      fluazifop-p-butyl
Setaria spp.                     ! haloxyfop-methyl
Sorghum halepense                 linuron
metolachlor
Amaranthus spp.                   metribuzin
Chenopodium spp.                 ! paraquat
Polygonum aviculare               pendimethalin
Portulaca oleracea                prometryn
Solanum nigrum                    sethoxydim
! trifluralin
vernolate
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
metribuzin              Senchor 35 WP       14       50,000
metolachlor                Dual 96 EC      134       48,000
! trifluralin             various 48 EC       74       44,000
alachlor                   Lazo 48 EC       36       19,000
! paraquat                various 20 SL        5       13,000
! haloxyfop-methyl       Verdict 7.5 EC        1       12,000


﻿2.7.15. Sugar Cane
The area increased steadily from 1980 to the 1989 figure of
322,000 ha. In 1990 the area fell back to 304,000 ha but it is
now expanding again as the soya area declines.
There is no significant usage of insecticides or fungicides.
Herbicides
Weeds affect the whole area.
1990 value $9m.
Main Weeds                     Herbicides Used
Cynodon dactylon                      2,4-D
Cyperus spp.                          ametryn
Digitaria horizontalis              ! atrazine
Eleusine indica                      dimethametryn
Leptochloa filiformis                 diuron
Rottboellia exaltata                  metolachlor
Setaria geniculata                    metribuzin
metsulfuron-methyl
Amaranthus spinosus                   MSMA
Cassia spp.                           terbutryn
Desmodium intortum
Ipomoea congesta
Mimosa pudi ca
Portulaca oleracea
Solanum nigrum
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (haA
2,4-D                      various EC      207       189,000
ametryn                various FL, WP      217       143,000
diuron                   Karmex 80 WP      160        67,000
Notes:    1.   About 10 te ai of dalapon are used annually for
roadside weed control.
2.   Two herbicides are used to increase the sugar
content of the cane: 0.4 te ai of fluazifop-p-
butyl over 10,000 ha, and 22 te ai of glyphosate
over 61,000 ha.


﻿2.7.16. Tobacco
Area 16-20,000 ha. Yield 1.5-1.8 te/ha depending upon the year
and the type of tobacco.
There is no significant usage of herbicides.
1990 value all pesticides $690,000.
Tobacco Insecticides
Insects affect the whole area; all treatable, all treated, with
about three applications.
1990 value $350,000.
Main Insect Pests                 Insecticides Used
Spodoptera spp.                       trichlorfon
Agrotis ipsilon
Gryllus assimilis
Epitrix spp.                          acephate
Heliothis spp.                      ! methomyl
Spodoptera spp.                     ! monocrotophos
Manduca sexta                       ! parathion-methyl
Systena spp.
Phthorimaea operculelia
Bemisia tabaci                        dimethoate
Myzus persicae                       ! monocrotophos
Thrips tabaci
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation     te ai Cum. Area (ha)
dimethoate              various 40 EC        6        15,000
! methomyl              various 21.6 EC       2.5       12,000
trichlorfon              Profitox 3 G        6        10,000


﻿Tobacco Fungicides
Diseases affect a small proportion only of the area:    around
2,000 ha. Where they occur they are always treatable and are
treated with multiple applications.
1990 value $200,000.
Main Diseases                    Fungicides Used
Cercospora nicotianae               benomyl
Peronospora tabacina                copper oxychloride
Phytophthora nicotianae             mancozeb
metalaxyl
propamocarb
Main products and formulations:
ai              Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
mancozeb                various 80 WP      20        9,000
copper oxychloride         various WP       5        3,000
Sucker Control
Two plant growth regulators are used for sucker control.    The
main one is maleic hydrazide at about 25 te ai. A very small
amount of fluometralin is also used.
1990 value $140,000.


﻿2.7.17. Cocoa
Area around 120,000 ha. Yield 0.46-0.49 te/ha.
1990 value all pesticides $1.4m.
Cocoa Insecticides
Two pests, Monalonia spp. and Xyleborus spp., affect 20,000 ha.
About 10,000 ha of this is treatable but only 5,000 ha are
treated, with one application.
1990 value $25,000.
Two main insecticides are used: about 1 te ai of ! dichlorvos
as Vapona 24 EC, and the same amount of trichlorfon as Dipterex
80 WP.
Cocoa Fungicides
Two fungal diseases, Phytophthora palmivora and Monilia roreri,
affect 20,000 ha. About 15,000 ha treatable, 10,000 ha treated
with two applications.
1990 value $250,000.
The main product used is copper oxychloride: 35 te ai as a 35
WP over 20,000 ha.   A small amount of a mancozeb + metalaxyl
mixture (Ridonil MZ 58 WP) is also used.
Cocoa Herbicides
Weeds affect 30,000 ha. About 15,000 ha of this is treatable and
some 10,000 ha are treated, with 1-2 applications.
1990 value $410,000.
The main product used is ! paraquat: 12 te ai as Gramoxone 20
SL over 15,000 ha. A small area is treated with glyphosate.


﻿2.7.18. Industrial & Roadside
Herbicides are used for total weed control in industrial and
roadside situations.
1990 value around $4m.
Herbicides Used
bromacil
dalapon
diuron
glyphosate
hexazinone
paraquat
Main products and formulations:
ai             Main Formulation    te ai Cum. Area (ha)
paraquat              Gramoxone 20 SL     80        N/A
glyphosate            Roundup 35.9 SL     34        N/A
dalapon                Basfapon 85 WP     18        N/A
diuron                   Karmex 80 WP     18        N/A


﻿2.7.19. Additional Crops
The majority of this sector is accounted for by coca.
1990 value all pesticides S3m.
Insecticides
1990 value $1.4m.
Main Insecticides Used
! carbaryl
! chlorfenvinphos
chlorpyrifos
deltamethrin
! dicrotophos
endosulfan
trichlorfon
Herbicides
1990 value $1.6m.
Main Herbicides Used
fluazifop-p-butyl
I paraquat
Usage of paraquat is believed to be in the region of 60 te ai per
year.


